The definition of a text tile (from
https://www.bitsavers.org/pdf/apple/lisa/toolkit_3.0/Package_2_Examples/17_Lisa_Development_System_Internals_Documentation_Feb84.pdf,
pages 37 and 38):

• Each text page (i.e., those following the header page) contains some number of complete lines of
text and is filled with null characters (ASCII 0) after the last line.

The Pascal run-time system should ensure that all text files end with a CR when CLOSE, in
particular, dealing with the case where the last action before the CLOSE was a WRITE instead of a
WRITELN. Similarly, the run-time system should also ensure that pages terminate with CRs even if
inordinately long lines are written by a series of WRITEs without any WRITELNs. (However,
determining when to insert a CR can be a tricky issue.) (For more on related issues, see the
following two points.)

• The end of a text page must terminate with at least one null. For simplicity, the first instance
of a CR-null sequence will signal the end of the page.

As a consequence of this simplifying assumption, a WRITELN followed by a WRITE (CHR(0)) will
inadvertently terminate the current page, but anyone writing nulls to a text file is living in a
state of sin and deserves what they get.

To be on the safe side, when dealing with text files at the BLOCKREAD level, should not assume that
a final CR-null always exists, making sure not to run off the end of page buffers. Our tools should
not blow up on invalid input.

• A line is a sequence of zero or more characters followed by a CR. A line may be “arbitrarily long”
(1023 bytes long, counting the CR, with room for a terminating null at the end of the page) but
programs (such as development system tools) may choose to consider as significant only the first N
characters (where N is a reasonable and well documented number, i.e., either 132 or 255).

The Pascal run-time system should allow the reading and writing of arbitrarily long lines. The
contents of a long line should be obtainable via a series of READs. The action of READLN should be
to read past the next CR, returning an IORESULT warning value if characters are skipped in the
process.

Support of “arbitrarily long” lines should not be viewed as a threat to tool implementors. Tools may
have reasonable restrictions on what text files they choose to accept, as long as they don't blow up
on other text files. Tools may choose to ignore the excess or unreasonably long lines, give a
warning, or signal an error and abort processing.

• A sequence of spaces at the beginning of a line may be compressed into a two-byte code, namely a
DLE character (ASCII 16) followed by a byte containing 32 plus the number of spaces represented.

• A null text file (i.e., one which has no contents — as might be created by opening a file and then
closing it before anything is written to it) consists of only the 1024-byte header page.
